So that our graduates tend to have a sort of common
point of view, regardless of their
specialization.
Then they will, then of course, within their
specialization, they will have the point of view
that they pick up from those faculty members. I
think we have been working very hard to encourage
them to stand on our shoulders,
to exceed what we have been able to think and
accomplish.
I think that more and more members of this
department are involving doctoral students in
research activities and co-publishing
activities so that they finish their degrees with
three or four publications already on the books.
It's not universal, but it's expanding.
The very nature of this department is that it is
diverse. The people that we hire have
some kind of specialization. There are very few of
us that are generic. I'm going to put it that way.
I'm on one hand and have fingers left over.
Otherwise, they're English educators or they're
reading specialists or they're math educators or
they're elementary educators or middle school
people or something. They've got some sort of
specialization. And they tend to focus on
teaching courses and working programs that that
take advantage of their specialization. So the
generalists
are kind of the amalgam that holds it all together,
if you will. And if the three or four or five of us
cast our votes all together with one cluster or
another cluster, we can have a majority, if you
will. We don't really have that political in the
way we go at it. It's much more a matter of
conscience. But still, the net result of that
interaction, interplay between the
specialization and the general has been a rather
unique kind of situation. There's diversity
within commonality or something. And is there a
pretty good degree of freedom to express that
diversity and that uniqueness? Yes, yes, yes. I
think there always has been. Certainly, when
Johnson there was, and I was department head, I
encouraged it. Where were you department head?
What years? Oh, dear. Well, I'm sure it's in the...
I was roughly... 1975 to 82. You were between
Johnson and, has there been three, just Johnson
and you and Dr. Peters? Well, David David was
interim department head for one year. Okay. Okay.
And he's serving in that capacity. I mean, he's
interim department head right now in IVT. Okay.
Now that we've talked about the department and the
college and everything else, can we talk just for a
few final moments on Robert Schutz and what
contributions or what things you feel the best
about that you've done since you've been here, or
maybe some insights, observations, an anecdote,
just something a little personal from your
standpoint or from your vantage point. For that
many years, I know there's got to be bunches of
them. Well, yeah. It's been a wonderful
experience for me. I've enjoyed it.
Well, in terms of what I've done, I think
programmatically I'm proudest of establishing,
or helping to establish, I didn't do it
single-handedly, obviously, helping to
establish a sense of program for master's degrees
and doctoral degrees, of requirements, of
standards, of expectations. I've embedded a
number of courses since I've been here. You
mentioned just a couple. Well, EDCI 675, which is
Teaching Strategies and Patterns of Learning, is
one. Okay. It was designed around the idea that we
should use what we know about how people learn to
design better ways to teach them. The basic idea. I
did it as an
outraged response to the educational
psychologists with whom I worked at Stanford who
didn't care about teaching. They just said,
learning is interesting all by itself. And I said,
but why do you make teachers learn about learning
if you're not going to help them draw the
connections? And they said, that's their
problem. It's not our problem. Then you belong in
psych, I think, not in ed psych. So I thought, boy,
if I ever get the chance, I'm going to make a course
that will do that. And it's been successful since
the first time I taught it. I expected to have five
people sign up for the first year. I had 50. The
first time I offered it, it just bowled me over. How
long ago was that? It was 1971, something like
that. And it's been taught ever since? Usually
twice a year. Are you still teaching it? I still
teach it. I'm teaching it right now. I do it
differently every time, but still, that's the
same basic focus. And John Denton shares that
course with me every now and again. He teaches it.
That's because I believe that no course should
belong to somebody. Because if it does, when that
person goes, dies, retires, whatever, it's gone.
That's true. If you really believe in the content
and the curriculum, then you've got to have two or
more people that are associated with it. And I
invented instructional theory. And I invented
curriculum theory. And I invented curricular
management theory. Well, I've done an
undergraduate course that was born, struggled,
and died. Well, those come about once in a while,
too. It was a good idea to try to help the
undergraduate see that knowledge has a
structure, and that when you learn your area of
special secondary, you learn your teaching
field, you need to learn its structure. So that you
can say to the students you teach, this is how what
I'm teaching you fits into this field. This is what
you're going to study next, and after that, what
you'll be able to do, and so on and so on. And
somebody who's got difficulties, well, you can
analyze what they're missing in the structure.
You talked a little bit, or you have mentioned
several different things that you do. Can you give
me just a brief overview? You're very busy, and we
talked a lot about time. How do you balance your
time as far as teaching and service type
activities and research?
In the last few years since I came back from the
Target 2000 project, well, when I was department
head, I was mostly an administrator with some
teaching So you could say service and teaching.
Target 2000 was the same story. So when I came back
from Target 2000 in 1983,
I was so far behind in everything that I had you to
scramble. I was hanging on by my fingernails as
though I was legitimate
as a teacher. I crawled back. I'm reasonably
confident of what I'm doing now. Between doing
that, updating and upgrading my teaching, and
taking care of all the doctoral people that I work
with, there isn't an awful lot of time left.
And that's where I'm in trouble right now. Is there
pressure put on professors in this department or
in any department To publish or to write? We're all
expected to, all the time. It is recognized that
some will be more productive than others. I have
some things on my writing agenda that I have worked
on and that I will continue to work on until I get
them done and published. But they're hard.
They're big papers. They're nasty, conceptual.
And it requires lots of time. It requires somebody
to sit down and interact with periodically in
order to do the job right. And I said, there's a lot
of time. Well, we only have so many hours, and we
just can't do everything we'd like to do. But is
there something that you would like to close with
that kind of ties all the rules? about all the
different things we've talked about with the
College of Education and the perceptions of the
past, the present, the future?
Well, it seems to me that the major things that have
happened are the tremendous growth in student
body, which she's experienced and we have
experienced. That has meant a growth in faculty.
numbers and diversities, which has offered us
wonderful opportunities to cross-fertilize. If
only we could ever find the time and the
opportunity to take advantage of that. I am
rather, now, rather systematically
trying to socialize with people in other
departments and other, trying to do that. At least
of letting them know that we're not boring.
And
also with students. I've started getting a lot of
entertaining with graduate students, which I've
enjoyed a lot. When you say systematically, and
I've had that feeling from a lot of teachers that
they don't get to do that enough. How do you
systematically go about it? Because everybody
has to make a concentrated effort because it does
not just happen because of the time constraints.
Well, you see, I'm in a somewhat unique position.
I'm in the process of a divorce, so I have no
children now. My children are grown, having
children of their own. So if I want to have somebody
in for dinner on Tuesday night, I have nobody to
consult but me. So there's no family disruption
that occurs as a result. I normally confine my
activity to the weekends, but occasionally, if
there's a need for something, Tuesday night or
Wednesday night. No, you simply have to say to
yourself, it's time to get out of the rut. Quit
seeing the same old people. To some degree, that
says you've got to take a little more risk. You've
got to invite
somebody that you think is somewhat
more prestigious than you are in the hierarchy of
things. And if they say no, why, you aren't going to
be crushed by it. So far, they've all said yes.
Maybe everybody's looking for somebody to start.
Somebody has to make that initial move. Well, I
like it. I'm really having a lot of fun doing it. As I
get to know people there, a lot of the strangeness
is cross-departmental
operation resolved. It's fun. That's great. So I
think
we can look for some interesting kinds of
developments in the next few years, on a number of
fronts, and hope that as the university evolves in
its growth toward excellence, we will be a part of
that. I don't have time probably to go into this,
but you kept mentioning or referencing the Target
2000. Did you? Were you? I was the staff director of
that. For this college or for the? For the whole
system. I didn't know that. Two years.
That report. Okay, great. Dr. Schultz, thank you.
I really enjoyed it. visiting with you and
learning a little bit more about this department
and your perceptions of what has gone on. And I hope
that you'll let me come back if I have a few added
questions.